Release notes for v5.0.0 (#1681)
dotnet/SqlClient: release-notes/5.0/5.0.0.md

  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.IBinarySerialize -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.IBinarySerialize
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.InvalidUdtException -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.InvalidUdtException
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlFacetAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlFacetAttribute
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlFunctionAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlFunctionAttribute
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlMethodAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlMethodAttribute
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlUserDefinedAggregateAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlUserDefinedAggregateAttribute
  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlUserDefinedTypeAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlUserDefinedTypeAttribute
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.DataAccessKind -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.DataAccessKind
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.Format -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.Format
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SystemDataAccessKind -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SystemDataAccessKind
- Dropped support for .NET Framework 4.6.1 [#1574](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1574)

### Added

> - Added `TDS 8`  version for TDSLogin. [#1657](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1657)
> - Added support for `TDS 8`. To use TDS 8, users should specify Encrypt=Strict in the connection string. [#1608](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1608) [Read more](#tds-8-enhanced-security)

Reviewer: Just a minor re-order
```suggestion
- Added support for `TDS 8`. To use TDS 8, users should specify Encrypt=Strict in the connection string. [#1608](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1608) [Read more](#tds-8-enhanced-security)
- Added `TDS 8`  version for TDSLogin. [#1657](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1657)
```

### TDS 8 Enhanced Security

To use TDS 8, specify Encrypt=Strict in the connection string. Strict mode disables TrustServerCertificate (always treated as False in Strict mode). HostNameInCertificate has been added to help some Strict mode scenarios. TDS 8 begins and continues all server communication inside a secure, encrypted TLS connection.

> New Encrypt values have been added to clarify connection encryption behavior. Encrypt=Mandatory is equavalent to Encrypt=True and encrypts connections during the TDS connection negotiation. Encrypt=Optional is equivalent to Encrypt=False and only encrypts the connection if the server tells the client that encryption is required during the TDS connection negotiation.

Reviewer: typo equivalent
```suggestion
New Encrypt values have been added to clarify connection encryption behavior. Encrypt=Mandatory is equivalent to Encrypt=True and encrypts connections during the TDS connection negotiation. Encrypt=Optional is equivalent to Encrypt=False and only encrypts the connection if the server tells the client that encryption is required during the TDS connection negotiation.
```

    }  
  }  
```

### New Attestation protocol `None`
A new attestation protocol called `None` is allowed in the connection string. This protocol will allow users to forgo enclave attestation for `VBS` enclaves. When this protocol is set, the enclave attestation URL property is optional.  

Connection string example:

```cs
//Attestation protocol NONE with no URL
"Data Source = {server}; Initial Catalog = {db}; Column Encryption Setting = Enabled; Attestation Protocol = None;"

```

### Suppress insecure TLS warnings
A security warning is output to the console if a TLS version less than 1.2 is used to negotiate encryption with the server. This warning can be suppressed on connections where `Encrypt = false` by enabling the following AppContext switch at application startup:
```cs
Switch.Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SuppressInsecureTLSWarning
```

## Target Platform Support

- .NET Framework 4.6.2+ (Windows x86, Windows x64)
- .NET Core 3.1+ (Windows x86, Windows x64, Windows ARM64, Windows ARM, Linux, macOS)
- .NET Standard 2.0+ (Windows x86, Windows x64, Windows ARM64, Windows ARM, Linux, macOS)

### Dependencies

#### .NET Framework

- Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI.runtime 5.0.0

> - Azure.Identity 1.6.0.0

Reviewer: where are the extra zeros coming from?
Azure.Identity for example the version is 1.6.0 and for the rest below it.

Author: revised with the same entries shown in the nuget package explorer

  - Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SqlUserDefinedTypeAttribute -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SqlUserDefinedTypeAttribute
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.DataAccessKind -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.DataAccessKind
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.Format -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.Format
  - (enum) Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.Server.SystemDataAccessKind -> Microsoft.SqlServer.Server.SystemDataAccessKind
- Dropped support for .NET Framework 4.6.1 [#1574](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1574)

### Added

- Added `TDS 8`  version for TDSLogin. [#1657](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1657)
- Added support for `TDS 8`. To use TDS 8, users should specify Encrypt=Strict in the connection string. [#1608](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1608) [Read more](#tds-8-enhanced-security)
- Added support for specifying Server SPN and Failover Server SPN on the connection. [#1607](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1607) [Read more](#server-spn)
- Added support for aliases when targeting .NET Core on Windows. [#1588](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1588) [Read more](#support-for-aliases)

> - Added SqlDataSourceEnumerator. [#1430](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1430), [Read more](#sql-data-source-enumerator-support)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added support for `SqlDataSourceEnumerator` on Windows. [#1430](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1430), [Read more](#sql-data-source-enumerator-support)
```

- Added new attestation protocol `None` option to forgo enclave attestation when using VBS enclaves. [#1425](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1425) and [#1419](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1419), [Read more](#new-attestation-protocol-none)
- Added a new AppContext switch to suppress insecure TLS warnings. [#1457](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1457), [Read more](#suppress-insecure-tls-warnings)

> 

Reviewer 2: Extra line.
```suggestion
```

### Fixed

- Fixed null SqlBinary as rowversion. [#1688](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1688)

> - Fixed KeyNotFoundException for the FailoverPartner key on SQL servers with availability group configured. [#1614](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1614)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed **KeyNotFoundException** for the `FailoverPartner` key on SQL servers with availability group configured. [#1614](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1614)
```

- Fixed naming, order, and formatting for `SqlDiagnosticsListener` on .NET Core and .NET. [#1637](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1637)
- Fixed NullReferenceException during Azure Active Directory authentication. [#1625](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1625)
- Added CommandText length validation when using stored procedure command types. [#1484](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1484)
- Fixed `GetSchema("StructuredTypeMembers")` to return correct schema information. [#1500](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1500), [#1639](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1639)

> - Fixed NullReferenceException when using `SqlDependency.Start` against an Azure SQL Database. [#1294](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1294)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed **NullReferenceException** when using `SqlDependency.Start` against an Azure SQL Database. [#1294](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1294)
```

> - Send the correct retained transaction descriptor in the MARS TDS Header when there is no current transaction on .NET 5+ and .NET Core. [#1624](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1624)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed transaction descriptor in the MARS TDS Header when there is no current transaction on .NET 5+ and .NET Core. [#1624](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1624)
```

- Parallelize SSRP requests on Linux and macOS when MultiSubNetFailover is specified. [#1578](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1578)
- Fixed connection failure by skipping Certificate Revocation List (CRL) check during authentication. [#1559](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1559)
- Fixed thread safety issue for `GetEnclaveProvider` by converting dictionary to concurrent dictionary. [#1451](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1451)

### Changed

> - Updated AuthProviderInfo struct to be match the changes in native SNI for `TDS 8` server certificate validation. [#1680](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1680)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated `AuthProviderInfo` struct to be matched the changes in native SNI for `TDS 8` server certificate validation. [#1680](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1680)
```

> - Change default system protocol to for `TDS 8` on managed code. [#1678](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1678)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated default system protocol for `TDS 8` on managed code. [#1678](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1678)
```

- Updated `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI` (.NET Framework dependency) and `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI.runtime` (.NET Core/Standard dependency) version to `5.0.0`. [#1608](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1608)
- Changed encoding UTF-7 to ASCII for SSRP Broadcast. [#1671](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1671)

> - Updated IdentityModel dependency from 6.8.0 to 6.21.0 and IdentityClient from 4.32.2 to 4.45.0. [#1646](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1646)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated `IdentityModel` dependency from 6.8.0 to 6.21.0 and `IdentityClient` from 4.32.2 to 4.45.0. [#1646](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1646)
```

> - Update Azure Identity dependency from 1.5.0 to 1.6.0. [#1611](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1611)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Updated **Azure Identity** dependency from 1.5.0 to 1.6.0. [#1611](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1611)
```

> - Improved Regex for SqlCommandSet. [#1548](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1548)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Improved Regex for `SqlCommandSet`. [#1548](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1548)
```

> - Rework `TdsParserStateObjectManaged` with nullable annotations. [#1555](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1555)

Reviewer 2: This can be moved to the various code improvements.

> - Adjust the default ConnectRetryCount against Azure Synapse OnDemand endpoints. [#1626](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1626)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Adjust the default **ConnectRetryCount** against Azure Synapse OnDemand endpoints. [#1626](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1626)
```

- Updated `Azure.Identity`  version to `1.5.0` and `Microsoft.Identity.Client` version to `4.30.1`. [#1462](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1462)

> - Replaced AlwaysEncryptedAttestationException with SqlException. [#1515](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1515)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Replaced `AlwaysEncryptedAttestationException` with `SqlException`. [#1515](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1515)
```

> - Improved error message when adding wrong type to SqlParameterCollection. [#1547](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1547)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Improved error message when adding wrong type to `SqlParameterCollection`. [#1547](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1547)
```

> - Modernized style in ValueUtilSmi. [#1351](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1351)

Reviewer 2: If it's only a style change, it should be moved to the various code improvements section.

- Changed SQL server codenames to version names in the code. [#1439](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1439)

> - Prevented subtype generation in project files. [#1452](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1452)

Reviewer 2: It can be moved to the various code improvements section.

- Changed `Array.Copy` to `Buffer.BlockCopy` for byte arrays. [#1366](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1366)

> - Changed files in csproj to be alphabetically sorted in netfx and netcore. [#1364](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1364)

Reviewer 2: It can be moved to the various code improvements section.

> - Sqlstream, SqlInternalTransaction and MetaDataUtilsSmi are moved to shared folder. [#1337](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1337), [#1346](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1346) and [#1339](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1339)

Reviewer 2: These can be moved to the various code improvements section.

- Added support for aliases when targeting .NET Core on Windows. [#1588](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1588) [Read more](#support-for-aliases)
- Added SqlDataSourceEnumerator. [#1430](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1430), [Read more](#sql-data-source-enumerator-support)
- Added new attestation protocol `None` option to forgo enclave attestation when using VBS enclaves. [#1425](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1425) and [#1419](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1419), [Read more](#new-attestation-protocol-none)
- Added a new AppContext switch to suppress insecure TLS warnings. [#1457](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1457), [Read more](#suppress-insecure-tls-warnings)

### Fixed

- Fixed KeyNotFoundException for the FailoverPartner key on SQL servers with availability group configured. [#1614](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1614)
- Fixed small inconsistency between netcore and netfx for EncrpytionOptions [#1672](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1672)
- Fixed `Microsoft.SqlServer.Server` netcore project package reference [#1654](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1654)

> - Fixed naming, order, and formatting for `SqlDiagnosticsListener` on .NET Core and .NET. [#1637] (https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1637)

Reviewer 3: Multiple instances of a space before the link below

### Changed

- Updated AuthProviderInfo struct to be match the changes in native SNI for `TDS 8` server certificate validation. [#1680](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1680)
- Change default system protocol to for `TDS 8` on managed code. [#1678](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1678)
- Updated `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI` (.NET Framework dependency) and `Microsoft.Data.SqlClient.SNI.runtime` (.NET Core/Standard dependency) version to `5.0.0`. [TBD](placeholder)
- Changed encoding UTF-7 to ASCII for SSRP Broadcast [#1671](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1671)
- Updated IdentityModel dependency from 6.8.0 to 6.21.0 and IdentityClient from 4.32.2 to 4.45.0 [#1646](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1646)
- Code health improvements [#1353](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1353) [#1354](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1354) [#1525](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1525) [#1186](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1186)
- Update Azure Identity dependency from 1.5.0 to 1.6.0.[#1611](https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1611)

> - Improved Regex for SqlCommandSet [#1548] (https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1548)

Reviewer 3: Remove space before link

> - Rework on `TdsParserStateObjectManaged` with nullable annotations. [#1555] (https://github.com/dotnet/SqlClient/pull/1555)

Reviewer 3: Remove space before link

### SQL Data Source Enumerator support
Provides a mechanism for enumerating all available instances of SQL Server within the local network.
```cs
using Microsoft.Data.Sql;

static void Main()  
  {  
    // Retrieve the enumerator instance and then the data.  
    SqlDataSourceEnumerator instance =  
      SqlDataSourceEnumerator.Instance;  
    System.Data.DataTable table = instance.GetDataSources();  
  
    // Display the contents of the table.  
    DisplayData(table);  
  
    Console.WriteLine("Press any key to continue.");  
    Console.ReadKey();  
  }  
  
  private static void DisplayData(System.Data.DataTable table)  
  {  
    foreach (System.Data.DataRow row in table.Rows)  
    {  
      foreach (System.Data.DataColumn col in table.Columns)  
      {  
        Console.WriteLine("{0} = {1}", col.ColumnName, row[col]);  
      }  
      Console.WriteLine("============================");  
    }  
  }  
```

### New Attestation protocol `None`

>  new attestation protocol called `None` will be allowed in the connection string. This protocol will allow users to forgo enclave attestation for `VBS` enclaves. When this protocol is set, the enclave attestation URL property is optional.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A new attestation protocol called `None` is allowed in the connection string. This protocol will allow users to forgo enclave attestation for `VBS` enclaves. When this protocol is set, the enclave attestation URL property is optional.  
```

Connection string example:

```cs
//Attestation protocol NONE with no URL
"Data Source = {server}; Initial Catalog = {db}; Column Encryption Setting = Enabled; Attestation Protocol = None;"

```

### Suppress insecure TLS warnings

> A security warning is ouptput on the console if the TLS version less than 1.2 is used to negotiate with the server. This warning could be suppressed on SQL connection while `Encrypt = false` by enabling the following AppContext switch on the application startup:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A security warning is output to the console if a TLS version less than 1.2 is used to negotiate encryption with the server. This warning can be suppressed on connections where `Encrypt = false` by enabling the following AppContext switch at application startup:
```
